doc/index.rst, before:

.. xlwings documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Sat Feb 22 22:00:11 2014.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

xlwings - make Excel fly!
=========================

xlwings is a BSD-licensed Python library that allows you to call Python from Excel and vice versa:

* Interact with Excel from Python using a syntax that is close to VBA yet Pythonic.
* Replace your VBA macros with Python code and still pass around your workbooks easily.

Currently, xlwings only works on Windows.

Interact with Excel from Python
-------------------------------
.. code-block:: python

    >>> from xlwings import Workbook, Range, Chart
    >>> wb = Workbook()  # Creates a connection with a new workbook
    >>> Range('A1').value = ['Foo 1', 'Foo 2', 'Foo 3', 'Foo 4']
    >>> Range('A2').value = [10, 20, 30, 40]
    >>> Range('A1').table.value
    [[u'Foo 1', u'Foo 2', u'Foo 3', u'Foo 4'], [10.0, 20.0, 30.0, 40.0]]
    >>> chart = Chart().add()
    >>> chart.set_source_data(Range('A1').table)


Replace VBA macros with Python
------------------------------

Let's say you want to fill your spreadsheet with standard normally distributed random numbers. Your VBA code is just one
line:

.. code-block:: vb.net

    Sub RandomNumbers()
        RunPython ("import mymodule; mymodule.rand_numbers()")
    End Sub

This essentially hands over control to ``mymodule.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    from xlwings import Workbook, Range

    wb = Workbook()  # Creates a reference to the calling Excel file

    def rand_numbers():
        """ produces standard normally distributed random numbers with shape (n,n)"""
        n = Range('Sheet1', 'B1').value
        rand_num = np.random.randn(n, n)
        Range('Sheet1', 'C3').value = rand_num


To make this run, just import de VBA module ``xlwings.bas`` in the VBA editor. It can be found in the directory of
your xlwings installation.

Easy deployment
---------------

* Just zip-up your Spreadsheet with your Python code and the ``xlwings.py`` file and send it around. The receiver only
  needs to have an installation of Python with `pywin32 <http://sourceforge.net/projects/pywin32/>`_ (and obviously
  all the other packages you're using).
* There is no need to install any Excel add-in.
* If this still sounds too complicated, just freeze your Python code into an exectuable and use
  ``RunFrozenPython`` instead ``RunPython``. This gives youa a standalone version of your Spreadsheet tool without any
  dependencies.

Commit message:

worked on the  documentation, mainly about Range

doc/index.rst, after:

xlwings - make Excel fly!
=========================

xlwings is a BSD-licensed Python library that makes it easy to call Python from Excel and vice versa:

* Interact with Excel from Python using a syntax that is close to VBA yet Pythonic.
* Replace your VBA macros with Python code and still pass around your workbooks as easy as before.

xlwings fully supports NumPy arrays and Pandas DataFrames. Currently, it only works on Windows.

.. note:: xlwings is currently in an early stage.
   The API might change in backward incompatible ways.

Interact with Excel from Python
-------------------------------

Writing some values to Excel and adding a chart is as easy as:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from xlwings import Workbook, Range, Chart
    >>> wb = Workbook()  # Creates a connection with a new workbook
    >>> Range('A1').value = ['Foo 1', 'Foo 2', 'Foo 3', 'Foo 4']
    >>> Range('A2').value = [10, 20, 30, 40]
    >>> Range('A1').table.value
    [[u'Foo 1', u'Foo 2', u'Foo 3', u'Foo 4'], [10.0, 20.0, 30.0, 40.0]]
    >>> chart = Chart().add()
    >>> chart.set_source_data(Range('A1').table)


Call Python from Excel
----------------------

If, for example, you want to fill your spreadsheet with standard normally distributed random numbers, your VBA code is just one
line:

.. code-block:: vb.net

    Sub RandomNumbers()
        RunPython ("import mymodule; mymodule.rand_numbers()")
    End Sub

This essentially hands over control to ``mymodule.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    from xlwings import Workbook, Range

    wb = Workbook()  # Creates a reference to the calling Excel file

    def rand_numbers():
        """ produces standard normally distributed random numbers with shape (n,n)"""
        n = Range('Sheet1', 'B1').value
        rand_num = np.random.randn(n, n)
        Range('Sheet1', 'C3').value = rand_num


To make this run, just import de VBA module ``xlwings.bas`` in the VBA editor. It can be found in the directory of
your xlwings installation.

Easy deployment
---------------

* Just zip-up your Spreadsheet with your Python code and the ``xlwings.py`` file and send it around. The receiver only
  needs to have an installation of Python with `pywin32 <http://sourceforge.net/projects/pywin32/>`_ (and obviously
  all the other packages you're using).
* There is no need to install any Excel add-in.
* If this still sounds too complicated, just freeze your Python code into an exectuable and use
  ``RunFrozenPython`` instead ``RunPython``. This gives youa a standalone version of your Spreadsheet tool without any
  dependencies.


.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :hidden:

    range
