docs/addin.rst, before:

.. _xlwings_addin:

Add-in
======

.. figure:: images/ribbon.png
    :scale: 80%

The xlwings add-in is the preferred way to be able to use ``RunPython`` or ``UDFs``. Note that you don't need an add-in
if you just want to manipulate Excel from Python via xlwings.

.. note:: The ribbon of the add-in is compatible with Excel >= 2007 on Windows and >= 2016 on Mac. You could, however,
  use the add-in with earlier versions but you would need to change the settings directly in the config file, see below.
  On Mac, all UDF related functionality is not available.

.. note:: The add-in is password protected with the password ``xlwings``. For debugging or to add new extensions, you need
  to unprotect it.

.. _addin_installation:

Installation
------------

To install the add-in, it's easiest to use the command line client: ``xlwings addin install``.

Then, to use ``RunPython`` or ``UDFs`` in a workbook, you need to set a reference to ``xlwings`` in the VBA editor, see
screenshot (Windows: ``Tools > References...``, Mac: it's on the lower left corner of the VBA editor). Note that when
you create a workbook via ``xlwings quickstart``, the reference is already set.

.. figure:: images/vba_reference.png
    :scale: 40%

Global Settings
---------------

While the defaults will often work out-of-the box, you can change the global settings directly in the add-in:

* ``Interpreter``: This is the path to the Python interpreter (works also with virtual or conda envs),
  e.g. ``"C:\Python35\pythonw.exe"`` or ``"/usr/local/bin/python3.5"``. An empty field defaults to ``pythonw`` that
  expects the interpreter to be set in the ``PATH`` on Windows or ``.bash_profile`` on Mac.
* ``PYTHONPATH``: If the source file of your code is not found, add the path here.
* ``UDF_MODULES``: Names of Python modules (without .py extension) from which the UDFs are being imported.
  Separate multiple modules by ";".
  Example: ``UDF_MODULES = "common_udfs;myproject"``
  The default imports a file in the same directory as the Excel spreadsheet with the same name but ending in ``.py``.
* ``Debug UDFs``: Check this box if you want to run the xlwings COM server manually for debugging, see :ref:`debugging`.
* ``Log File``: Leave empty for default location (see below) or provide the full path, e.g. .
* ``RunPython: Use UDF Server``:  Uses the same COM Server for RunPython as for UDFs. This will be faster, as the
  interpreter doesn't shut down after each call.
* ``Restart UDF Server``: This shuts down the UDF Server/Python interpreter. It'll be restarted upon the next function call.

.. _config_file:

Config File
-----------

The settings in the xlwings Ribbon are stored in a config file that can also be manipulated externally. The location is

* Windows: ``.xlwings\xlwings.conf`` in your user folder  
* Mac Excel 2016: ``~/Library/Containers/com.microsoft.Excel/Data/xlwings.conf``
# Mac Excel 2011: ``~/.xlwings/xlwings.conf``

The format is as follows (keys are uppercase):

.. code-block:: bash

    "INTERPRETER","pythonw"
    "PYTHONPATH",""

.. note:: Mac Excel 2011 users have to create and edit the config file manually under ``~/.xlwings/xlwings.conf`` as the
    ribbon is not supported.

.. _addin_wb_settings:

Workbook Settings
-----------------

The global settings of the Ribbon/Config file can be overridden for each workbook by adding a sheet with the 
name ``xlwings.conf``. When you create a new project with ``xlwings quickstart``, it'll already have such a sheet
but you need to rename it to ``xlwings.conf`` to make it active.


.. figure:: images/workbook_config.png
    :scale: 40%


Alternative: Standalone VBA module
----------------------------------

Sometimes it might be useful to run xlwings code without having to install an add-in first. To do so, you
need to use the ``standalone`` option when creating a new project: ``xlwings quickstart myproject --standalone``.

This will add the content of the add-in as a single VBA module so you don't need to set a reference to the add-in anymore.
It will still read in the settings from your ``xlwings.conf`` if you don't override them by using a sheet with the name ``xlwings.conf``.


.. _log:

Log File default locations
--------------------------

These log files are used for the error pop-up windows:

* Windows: ``%APPDATA%\xlwings.log``
* Mac with Excel 2011: ``/tmp/xlwings.log``
* Mac with Excel 2016: ``~/Library/Containers/com.microsoft.Excel/Data/xlwings.log``

Commit message:

Read config from (optional) xlwings.conf in workbook's directory

docs/addin.rst, after:

.. _xlwings_addin:

Add-in
======

.. figure:: images/ribbon.png
    :scale: 80%

The xlwings add-in is the preferred way to be able to use ``RunPython`` or ``UDFs``. Note that you don't need an add-in
if you just want to manipulate Excel from Python via xlwings.

.. note:: The ribbon of the add-in is compatible with Excel >= 2007 on Windows and >= 2016 on Mac. You could, however,
  use the add-in with earlier versions but you would need to change the settings directly in the config file, see below.
  On Mac, all UDF related functionality is not available.

.. note:: The add-in is password protected with the password ``xlwings``. For debugging or to add new extensions, you need
  to unprotect it.

.. _addin_installation:

Installation
------------

To install the add-in, it's easiest to use the command line client: ``xlwings addin install``.

Then, to use ``RunPython`` or ``UDFs`` in a workbook, you need to set a reference to ``xlwings`` in the VBA editor, see
screenshot (Windows: ``Tools > References...``, Mac: it's on the lower left corner of the VBA editor). Note that when
you create a workbook via ``xlwings quickstart``, the reference is already set.

.. figure:: images/vba_reference.png
    :scale: 40%

Global Settings
---------------

While the defaults will often work out-of-the box, you can change the global settings directly in the add-in:

* ``Interpreter``: This is the path to the Python interpreter (works also with virtual or conda envs),
  e.g. ``"C:\Python35\pythonw.exe"`` or ``"/usr/local/bin/python3.5"``. An empty field defaults to ``pythonw`` that
  expects the interpreter to be set in the ``PATH`` on Windows or ``.bash_profile`` on Mac.
* ``PYTHONPATH``: If the source file of your code is not found, add the path here.
* ``UDF_MODULES``: Names of Python modules (without .py extension) from which the UDFs are being imported.
  Separate multiple modules by ";".
  Example: ``UDF_MODULES = "common_udfs;myproject"``
  The default imports a file in the same directory as the Excel spreadsheet with the same name but ending in ``.py``.
* ``Debug UDFs``: Check this box if you want to run the xlwings COM server manually for debugging, see :ref:`debugging`.
* ``Log File``: Leave empty for default location (see below) or provide the full path, e.g. .
* ``RunPython: Use UDF Server``:  Uses the same COM Server for RunPython as for UDFs. This will be faster, as the
  interpreter doesn't shut down after each call.
* ``Restart UDF Server``: This shuts down the UDF Server/Python interpreter. It'll be restarted upon the next function call.

.. _config_file:

Config File
-----------

The settings in the xlwings Ribbon are stored in a config file that can also be manipulated externally. The location is

* Windows: ``.xlwings\xlwings.conf`` in your user folder  
* Mac Excel 2016: ``~/Library/Containers/com.microsoft.Excel/Data/xlwings.conf``
# Mac Excel 2011: ``~/.xlwings/xlwings.conf``

The format is as follows (keys are uppercase):

.. code-block:: bash

    "INTERPRETER","pythonw"
    "PYTHONPATH",""

.. note:: Mac Excel 2011 users have to create and edit the config file manually under ``~/.xlwings/xlwings.conf`` as the
    ribbon is not supported.

Workbook Directory Config File
------------------------------

The global settings of the Ribbon/Config file can be overridden for one or more workbooks by creating a ``xlwings.conf`` file
in the workbook's directory.

.. _addin_wb_settings:

Workbook Settings
-----------------

The global settings of the Ribbon/Config file (and the optional workbook directory config file) can be overridden for each 
workbook by adding a sheet with the name ``xlwings.conf``. When you create a new project with ``xlwings quickstart``, it'll 
already have such a sheet but you need to rename it to ``xlwings.conf`` to make it active.


.. figure:: images/workbook_config.png
    :scale: 40%


Alternative: Standalone VBA module
----------------------------------

Sometimes it might be useful to run xlwings code without having to install an add-in first. To do so, you
need to use the ``standalone`` option when creating a new project: ``xlwings quickstart myproject --standalone``.

This will add the content of the add-in as a single VBA module so you don't need to set a reference to the add-in anymore.
It will still read in the settings from your ``xlwings.conf`` if you don't override them by using a sheet with the name ``xlwings.conf``.


.. _log:

Log File default locations
--------------------------

These log files are used for the error pop-up windows:

* Windows: ``%APPDATA%\xlwings.log``
* Mac with Excel 2011: ``/tmp/xlwings.log``
* Mac with Excel 2016: ``~/Library/Containers/com.microsoft.Excel/Data/xlwings.log``
