docs/command_line.rst, before:

.. _command_line:

Command Line Client (CLI)
=========================

xlwings comes with a command line client. On Windows, type the commands into a ``Command Prompt``, on Mac, type them into a ``Terminal``. To get an overview over all commands, simply type ``xlwings`` and hit Enter:

.. code:: console

    addin               Run "xlwings addin install" to install the Excel add-
                        in by copying it to the XLSTART folder. Instead of
                        "install" you can also use "update", "remove" or
                        "status". Note that this command may take a while.
                        (New in 0.6.0)
    quickstart          Run "xlwings quickstart myproject" to create a folder
                        called "myproject" in the current directory with an
                        Excel file and a Python file, ready to be used.
    runpython           macOS only: run "xlwings runpython install" if you
                        want to enable the RunPython calls without installing
                        the add-in. This will create the following file:
                        ~/Library/Application
                        Scripts/com.microsoft.Excel/xlwings.applescript
                        (new in 0.7.0)
    restapi             Use "xlwings restapi run" to run the xlwings REST API
                        via Flask dev server. Accepts "--host" and "--port" as
                        optional arguments.
    license             xlwings PRO: Use "xlwings license update -k KEY" where
                        "KEY" is your personal (trial) license key. This will
                        update ~/.xlwings/xlwings.conf with the LICENSE_KEY
                        entry. If you have a paid license, you can run
                        "xlwings license deploy" to create a deploy key. This
                        is not availalbe for trial keys.
    config              Run "xlwings config create" to create the user config
                        file (~/.xlwings/xlwings.conf) which is where the
                        settings from the Ribbon add-in are stored. It will
                        configure the Python interpreter that you are running
                        this command with. To reset your configuration, run
                        this with the "--force" flag which will overwrite your
                        current configuration.
                        (New in 0.19.5)
    code                Run "xlwings code embed" to embed the Python modules
                        of the current dir in your active Excel file. To run
                        embedded code, you need an xlwings PRO license.
                        (New in 0.20.2)

Commit message:

allow to embed a single module

docs/command_line.rst, after:

.. _command_line:

Command Line Client (CLI)
=========================

xlwings comes with a command line client. On Windows, type the commands into a ``Command Prompt``, on Mac, type them into a ``Terminal``. To get an overview over all commands, simply type ``xlwings`` and hit Enter:

.. code:: console

    addin               Run "xlwings addin install" to install the Excel add-
                        in by copying it to the XLSTART folder. Instead of
                        "install" you can also use "update", "remove" or
                        "status". Note that this command may take a while.
                        (New in 0.6.0)
    quickstart          Run "xlwings quickstart myproject" to create a folder
                        called "myproject" in the current directory with an
                        Excel file and a Python file, ready to be used.
    runpython           macOS only: run "xlwings runpython install" if you
                        want to enable the RunPython calls without installing
                        the add-in. This will create the following file:
                        ~/Library/Application
                        Scripts/com.microsoft.Excel/xlwings.applescript
                        (new in 0.7.0)
    restapi             Use "xlwings restapi run" to run the xlwings REST API
                        via Flask dev server. Accepts "--host" and "--port" as
                        optional arguments.
    license             xlwings PRO: Use "xlwings license update -k KEY" where
                        "KEY" is your personal (trial) license key. This will
                        update ~/.xlwings/xlwings.conf with the LICENSE_KEY
                        entry. If you have a paid license, you can run
                        "xlwings license deploy" to create a deploy key. This
                        is not availalbe for trial keys.
    config              Run "xlwings config create" to create the user config
                        file (~/.xlwings/xlwings.conf) which is where the
                        settings from the Ribbon add-in are stored. It will
                        configure the Python interpreter that you are running
                        this command with. To reset your configuration, run
                        this with the "--force" flag which will overwrite your
                        current configuration.
                        (New in 0.19.5)
    code                Run "xlwings code embed" to embed all Python modules
                        of the current dir in your active Excel file. Use the
                        "--file" flag to only import a single file by
                        providing its path. To run embedded code, you need an
                        xlwings PRO license.
                        (New in 0.20.2)
